

===== PAGE 1 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical
Debt Repayment
MOHAMMAD SADEGH SHEIKHAEI and YUAN TIAN, School of Computing, Queen’s University, Canada
SHAOWEI WANG,Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba, Canada
BOWEN XU, Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, USA
Self-Admitted Technical Debt (SATD), cases where developers intentionally acknowledge suboptimal solutions in code through
comments, poses a significant challenge to software maintainability. Left unresolved, SATD can degrade code quality, increase
maintenance costs, and hinder long-term software sustainability. Automating SATD repayment is therefore essential to alleviate
developer burden. While Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in tasks like code generation and program repair, their
potential in automated SATD repayment remains underexplored.
In this paper, we identify three key technical challenges in training and evaluating LLMs for SATD repayment: (1) dataset
representativeness and scalability, (2) removal of irrelevant SATD repayment samples, and (3) limitations of existing evaluation metrics,
i.e., BLEU and CrystalBLEU. To address the first two dataset-related challenges, we adopt a language-independent SATD tracing tool
and design a 10-step filtering pipeline to extract SATD repayments from repository commit histories, leveraging LLM-as-judge for
relevance filtering. This results in two new large-scale SATD repayment datasets: 58,722 items for Python and 97,347 items for Java. To
improve evaluation, we introduce two diff-based metrics, BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff, which measure code changes rather than
whole code, thereby mitigating the impact of SATD-irrelevant source code. Additionally, we propose a new metric, Line-Level Exact
Match on Diff (LEMOD), which is both interpretable and informative, providing fine-grained insights into SATD repayment quality.
Using our new benchmarks and evaluation metrics, we evaluate two types of automated SATD repayment methods: fine-tuning smaller
models (a few hundred million parameters) and prompt engineering with large-scale models, including four SOTA open-source LLMs
and GPT-4o-mini. Our results reveal that while fine-tuned small models achieve Exact Match (EM) scores comparable to prompt-based
approaches, they underperform on BLEU-based metrics and LEMOD. The best EM performance is achieved by Gemma-2-9B, correctly
addressing 10.1% of Python SATDs and 8.1% of Java SATDs with a simple prompt. The only previous study in this domain focused solely
on Java, achieving an EM score of 2.3%. When using BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD metrics, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct and
GPT-4o-mini deliver the highest performance. While our three proposed metrics demonstrate strong correlations with EM (0.65~0.84),
both BLEU and CrystalBLEU show almost no correlation with this intuitive metric (0.01~0.08), highlighting their largely unpredictable
behavior when applied directly to the entire code rather than the diff. Our work contributes a robust benchmark, improved evaluation
metrics, and a comprehensive evaluation of LLMs, advancing research on automated SATD repayment.
CCS Concepts: •Software and its engineering → Software development process management ; •Computing methodologies
→ Artificial intelligence.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Self-Admitted Technical Debt, Large Language Models, SATD Repayment Dataset, SATD Repayment
Evaluation
Authors’ Contact Information: Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, sadegh.sheikhaei@queensu.ca; Yuan Tian, y.tian@queensu.ca, School of Computing,
Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada; Shaowei Wang, Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, Shaowei.
Wang@umanitoba.ca; Bowen Xu, Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA, bxu22@ncsu.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM 1
arXiv:2501.09888v1  [cs.SE]  17 Jan 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
ACM Reference Format:
Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu. 2025. Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated
Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment. In Proceedings of Preprint submitted to ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology (TOSEM). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 30 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 Introduction
Technical Debt (TD) refers to the intentional use of suboptimal solutions in software design or coding, typically to meet
tight deadlines or address immediate resource constraints [10]. Similarly to financial debt, technical debt accumulates
“interest” in the form of increased future costs due to earlier poor design and implementation choices [ 3, 4]. The
awareness of the technical debts in a software system is often achieved by developers self-admitting them in software
artifacts, such as code comments (e.g., “TODO: Optimize it ”), commit messages, and issue reports. This type of TD
has been referred to as Self-Admitted Technical Debt (SATD) [28]. This notion enables many data-driven studies that
empirically analyze the introduction and removal of technical debts by tracing the lifespan of SATDs within the
history of a software project. Prior research finds that SATD is present in 2.4% to 31% of the source files [28], with a
median lifespan ranging from 18 to 172 days [21]. Prolonged unresolved SATD negatively impacts code quality and
maintainability, increasing future technical costs and engineering effort [9, 16].
These data-driven empirical studies have not only shed light on the statistics and lifespan of SATD, but also motivate
an important question: Can we leverage historical or cross-project technical debt repayments to automatically address
SATDs in a timely manner? This question becomes especially pertinent with the advent of Large Language Models
(LLMs), which have demonstrated significant success in automating various code-related tasks, such as code generation,
program repair, and code refactoring. However, SATD repayment introduces unique challenges that distinguish it from
these tasks. SATD encompasses diverse categories, including requirement debt and design debt, which are broader
and more abstract than typical code-related issues. Furthermore, SATD comments often describe best practices, design
conventions, or non-functional concerns, rather than providing explicit functional summaries or bug descriptions. As a
result, SATD repayment demands specialized approaches that extend beyond conventional methods for program repair
and refactoring.
To train and evaluate models for automated SATD repayment, it is crucial to use datasets derived from real-world
scenarios.1 Recently, Mastropaolo et al. [23] addressed this need by collecting a dataset of 5,039 SATD instances extracted
from 595 popular Java projects hosted on GitHub. Their dataset was constructed in two major steps: (1) identifying
SATDs in the repository commit history and mining code changes involving the removal of SATD comments, and
(2) applying heuristics to determine cases where the SATD was addressed. Using this dataset, they compared smaller
fine-tuned LLMs (e.g., CodeT5-base with 220 million parameters) with GPT-3.5 in a zero-shot setting (without continual
training on task-specific data). They reported that fine-tuned smaller LLMs outperformed GPT-3.5. However, even the
best-performing model, the CodeT5 fine-tuned on 3,537 SATD repayment samples, successfully addressed only 2.24% of
SATDs in their evaluation set. Based on these results, Mastropaolo et al. concluded that automated SATD repayment
remains a highly challenging task.
While Mastropaolo et al. ’s work represents a pioneering contribution by introducing a benchmarking system for
evaluating LLMs in SATD repayment, we argue that their conclusion may be premature. A more rigorous evaluation
of LLM performance is necessary, as we identify three technical challenges not addressed in their data creation and
1Theoretically, LLMs could be used to generate synthetic SATD samples; however, these samples may fail to capture the diversity and complexity of
real-world SATDs and are likely to reflect the inherent biases present in the LLMs’ training data [19].
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 3 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 3
benchmarking process. These challenges hinder a more realistic assessment of the capabilities of LLMs in automated
SATD repayment.
(Ch#1) Lack of representativeness due to limitations of the SATD tracing tool. Mastropaolo et al. leveraged a tool
named SATDBailiff [1] to extract code changes that contain the removal of SATDs from repositories. However,
SATDBailiff relies on a Java parser, which requires significant computational time to process large repositories.
As a result, in Mastropaolo’s experiment, the tool failed to process 6,162 out of 6,971 targeted repositories (88%)
within the allocated time limit of one hour per repository. The low repository-level extraction success rate of
12% may result in a biased dataset, potentially underrepresenting more complex repositories. Furthermore, since
SATDBailiff is language-dependent, the analysis was restricted to Java projects, excluding projects written in
other programming languages, such as Python, which are widely used and could provide valuable insights into
SATD repayment.
(Ch#2) Inclusion of Non-SATD repayments due to overly permissive heuristics. Mastropaolo et al. identified
SATD repayment cases by applying a heuristic that checks whether an SATD comment is removed and an update
is present in the corresponding method in the subsequent version. However, this heuristic is overly permissive
and often introduces false positives, where the code containing the SATD comment has been updated, but the
changes are unrelated to addressing the SATD. Figure 1 illustrates an example where the deleted TODO comment
suggested returning the error messages; however, the updated code did not produce any error messages, indicating
that the SATD was not addressed or repaid. To assess the severity of this issue, we replicated Mastropaolo et
al. ’s filtering steps and manually analyzed 100 SATD removal samples (ref. Section 3.1). In the Java dataset, we
observed that 38 samples were unclear or unrelated to SATD repayment. When we applied this heuristic to a
newly created Python SATD dataset, the accuracy declined further, with only 45 out of 100 mined SATD removals
corresponding to actual repayments.
Fig. 1. Example of a Java SATD removal where code update is unrelated to SATD repayment
(Ch#3) Inadequacy of evaluation metrics for measuring code similarity to ground truth. Mastropaolo et al.
employed two evaluation metrics: Exact Match (EM) and CrystalBLEU. The Exact Match metric is simple and
intuitive, assigning a score of 1 if the generated code perfectly matches the ground truth (method containing the
SATD with it being addressed) and 0 if there is any discrepancy, no matter how minor (e.g., a single character
difference). While straightforward, EM often underestimates model performance because there can be multiple
valid solutions and coding styles for addressing SATD. Although preprocessing steps, such as removing whitespace
and comments, can reduce false mismatches, small variations in code structure or naming conventions can
still result in non-matches. Although CrystalBLEU [12] is designed to measure fine-grained similarity between
generated code and the ground truth, Mastropaolo et al. applied it directly to the entire source code (after SATD
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
repayment) and the ground truth. This whole-code based evaluation approach introduces potential bias because
portions of the method that are unrelated to the SATD can disproportionately influence the similarity score,
making the results difficult to interpret. For instance, we observed that ignoring the SATD comment entirely, i.e.,
comparing the source code in the method before SATD repayment with ground truth, often results in a higher
CrystalBLEU score compared to cases where the SATD is being addressed (ref. Section 3.2).
To systematically address the three identified technical challenges, we investigate the following four research
questions:
• RQ1: Can we build a benchmark for automated SATD repayment that is more representative and less noisy?
• RQ2: Can we design evaluation metrics that are both effective and interpretable for automated SATD repayment?
• RQ3: Does a cleaner dataset lead to a better performance in automated SATD repayment?
• RQ4: How do fine-tuned small models compare to prompt-based approaches using large LLMs for automated
SATD repayment?
To answer RQ1, we propose a new large-scale benchmark dataset specifically tailored for SATD repayment, addressing
the first two technical challenges. Instead of using SATDBailiff (Ch#1), we leverage the SATD Tracker [33] for SATD
repayment candidate mining, which offers two significant advantages. First, SATD Tracker uses a language-independent
approach, enabling the generation of SATD datasets across multiple programming languages, including Java and Python.
Second, it is significantly faster, allowing efficient processing of large-scale datasets. Using the same repository selection
criteria as Mastropaolo et al., SATD Tracker successfully processed 97.5% of 13,748 Python repositories and 96.4%
of 7,694 Java repositories in just a few days, far outperforming the 50 days required by SATDBailiff. This improved
scalability resulted in a substantially larger dataset: 1,847,392 SATD removals for Java (compared to 139,804 previously
detected) and 1,059,299 removals for Python. To ensure dataset quality and remove non-SATD repayments (Ch#2), we
applied LLMs with zero-shot prompting to filter out code updates unrelated to SATD repayment. This filtering approach
achieved F1 scores of 86.2% for Java and 84.8% for Python in detecting SATD repayments, resulting in a cleaner dataset.
To answer RQ2 and address the limitations of existing evaluation metrics (Ch#3), we propose a diff-based evaluation
approach. Specifically, we compute the differences (diffs) between the code before repayment and the ground truth, as
well as between the code before repayment and the LLM-generated code. BLEU or CrystalBLEU scores are then calculated
on these diffs, allowing us to focus solely on updated lines while ignoring unchanged code. Our experiments show
that this method produces more interpretable results and correlates better with EM scores, i.e., achieving correlations
of 0.65 to 0.83 for diff-based evaluation, compared to less than 0.1 for prior whole-code based evaluation. Moreover,
we introduce Line-Level Exact Match on Diff (LEMOD), a new metric that combines the intuitiveness of EM with the
granularity of diff-based evaluation. LEMOD computes precision, recall, and F1 scores (well-established metrics in
machine learning) at the line level, providing a clear and meaningful assessment. Notably, LEMOD correlates strongly
with EM, achieving correlation values of 0.837 for Python and 0.748 for Java.
With a cleaner dataset and improved evaluation metrics, we revisit the benchmarking of automated SATD repayment
by answering RQ3 and RQ4. Mastropaolo et al. [23] reported that their fine-tuned model achieved an EM of only 2.3%.
Given our improved dataset, we hypothesize that models can achieve better performance. Indeed, our experiments in
RQ3 show that GPT-4o-mini achieves an EM of 7.5% on the new benchmark (using the filtered Mastropaolo’s dataset),
significantly outperforming its performance on their original dataset (4.6%). Additionally, the fine-tuned model trained
on the filtered dataset achieves an EM score of 6.2%, surpassing its performance when fine-tuned on a controlled subset
of the original dataset (4.9%).
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 5 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 5
While RQ3 utilizes the Mastropaolo (Java specific) dataset to study the impact of data cleaning on the performance of
automated SATD repayment, RQ4 employs our extensive Python and Java datasets to evaluate the effectiveness of LLMs
in automated SATD repayment. Specifically, we compare two types of approaches for automated SATD repayment:
fine-tuning smaller models and prompt engineering with larger models. For fine-tuning, we employ two models from
the CodeT5p family (an updated version of CodeT5), while for prompt engineering, we consider five SOTA LLMs,
including both open-source and closed-source ones. Our experimental results reveal that while fine-tuned small models
(e.g., from the FlanT5p family) achieve competitive EM scores, they underperform on more detailed metrics such as
BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD when compared to prompt-based larger LLMs. This finding aligns with some
previous studies [18] but contradicts others [23, 34], including the conclusion drawn by Mastropaolo et al.
Our work makes the following key contributions:
• We created large, clean datasets of SATD repayment by analyzing all commits in the master branch of 14,097
Python and 7,983 Java repositories. Initially, we identified 1,607,408 SATD items in Python and 2,672,485 in
Java projects. Following our 10-step filtering process, the final Python dataset includes 58,722 SATD repayment
samples, and the Java dataset contains 97,347 samples, about 20 times larger than the Mastropaolo’s dataset.
• We proposed BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff evaluation metrics, which are more reliable and interpretable than
applying BLEU or CrystalBLEU to the whole code. We also introduced a new metric, Line-Level Exact Match on
Diff (LEMOD), which provides more detailed information than the other metrics studied.
• We leveraged several open-source LLMs and a proprietary model (GPT4o-mini) with various prompts to examine
the effectiveness of large language models in automated SATD repayment, and compared these results with
those from smaller, fine-tuned models. The best Exact Match (EM) performance was achieved by Gemma-2-9B,
which correctly addressed 10.1% of Python SATDs and 8.1% of Java SATDs using a simple prompt. For BLEU-diff,
CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct and GPT-4o-mini deliver the highest performance.
• The datasets, results, and source code associated with this study are available at GitHub 2.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides the background and related work. Our
research questions and the approach for each are presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the study setup, including
datasets, evaluation metrics, and selected LLMs. The results and analysis are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, we
discuss various topics, including the oracle prompt template and SATD repayment coverage across all experiments.
Section 7 presents the threats to the validity of our study. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper and outlines future
work.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 Empirical Study on SATD Removal and Automated SATD Repayment
SATD repayment is critical for software developers, as incremental SATDs impact code maintainability and long-term
software quality. Empirical studies on SATD removal reveal the complexities and developer behaviors around SATD
management. Maldonado et al.[ 21] found that most SATDs in open-source projects are eventually removed, often
by the original introducers, indicating developers’ active management of technical debt. Zampetti et al.[39] further
discovered that SATD removals frequently happen as part of unrelated code changes, requiring varied modifications
that range from simple condition updates to extensive control-flow or API adjustments, emphasizing the challenge
in automating SATD repayment. Contrary to the notion of “accidental” removals, Tan et al.[36] and Pina et al.[26]
2https://github.com/RISElabQueens/SATD-Auto-Repayment
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
reported that developers tend to make deliberate decisions on SATD repayment, addressing debt as soon as possible.
Studies on SATD in specific domains also offer insights: Liu et al.[17] noted that requirement debt in deep learning
frameworks is most commonly removed, while Yasmin et al.[38] highlighted time savings potential by recognizing
duplicate SATD comments.
Manual removal of SATDs is often inconsistent and labor-intensive, making automation a promising approach to
enable developers to address SATDs more efficiently and at earlier stages. In the literature, three notable studies propose
automated methods for SATD repayment. The first study, by Zampetti et al. [40], presents a model that classifies SATD
repayment types into six categories based on the SATD comment and its associated source code. This model provides
recommendations on the type of changes needed, offering structured guidance for repayment; however, it stops short
of generating the actual code modifications required to implement these changes.
Mastropaolo et al. [23] move beyond categorization by automatically recommending specific code fixes using pre-
trained models. They employ a SATD tracking tool, SATDBailiff, to identify deleted SATD comments and apply heuristic
rules to determine addressed (repaid) instances. They evaluate both CodeT5 and ChatGPT (3.5) for their capability to
generate the necessary code modifications directly. Mastropaolo et al. evaluate the performance of SATD repayment
models using two primary metrics: Exact Match (EM) and CrystalBLEU [ 12] scores. EM assesses the percentage of
instances where the model’s output precisely matches the ground truth code change, while CrystalBLEU evaluates
the similarity of generated and target code by rewarding n-gram overlaps while reducing biases from trivial matches.
They reported that CodeT5, fine-tuned on generic code changes (284,190 code changes) and SATD-specific data (5,039
identified repaid SATD), achieves a limited success rate (2%-8% in terms of EM) in automated SATD repayment,
depending on model configurations. ChatGPT, used in a zero-shot setting, performs significantly worse, underlining
the challenges of SATD repayment for general-purpose models.
More recently, OBrien et al. [25] examined the potential of TODO comments as prompts to guide automated code
completion tools, specifically GitHub Copilot, for SATD repayment. Their dataset includes 36,381 TODO comments
extracted from Python repositories, with a manually curated sample of 380 comments to evaluate Copilot’s response
to SATD-related prompts. Through experiments, they assess whether TODO comments, when included in prompts,
improve code quality or lead to unintended reproduction of technical debt. The findings reveal that while Copilot can
sometimes generate solutions that address TODO comments, it also risks perpetuating technical debt symptoms. The
authors propose best practices in prompt engineering to reduce these risks, showing that modifying prompt content
can enhance code quality and mitigate technical debt issues.
While the studies by Zampetti et al. [40] and O’Brien et al. [25] are about SATD repayment, their objectives differ
from ours. Zampetti et al. ’s approach focuses on predicting the category of changes required to address SATD, whereas
our aim is to generate code that directly addresses SATD. OBrien et al. ’s approach relies on the method’s signature
and docstring (with or without an injected SATD comment) to generate the method body, ignoring the ground truth
code. In other words, their approach disregards the current implementation of the method, and during the evaluation
phase, they did not consider the ground truth code from the repository. Instead, they manually checked whether the
generated code addressed the SATD, regardless of whether it was the expected code and had the expected functionality
for that project. The only prior work that accounted for ground truth from real SATD repayment scenarios is the study
by Mastropaolo et al. [23], with which we compare our results in this paper.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 7 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 7
2.2 Other Studies on SATD Management
SATD management encompasses tasks such as identification, classification, and tracking. Identification methods
determine if a comment signals technical debt (SATD), with approaches ranging from rule-based (e.g., MAT [ 13],
PENTACET [35]) to machine learning (ML) models like CNN [31], BERT [29], and LLMs [34]. Classification, introduced
by Maldonado and Shihab [22], categorizes SATD comments (e.g., Design, Requirement), with studies expanding this
categorization, especially in domains like Blockchain and ML [2, 24, 27].
SATD tracking, which builds on SATD identification, focuses on tracing each SATD’s lifespan across a repository’s
commit history, providing essential data on SATD removals for training automated SATD repayment models. Maldonado
et al.[21] introduced a basic approach that tracks SATDs across file versions by matching content, labeling SATDs as
deleted if they no longer match. However, this method fails when multiple SATDs share content or when minor edits
occur, causing tracking errors. AlOmar et al.[1] improved upon this with SATDBailiff, which uses method and class
names to map SATDs more accurately across commits. SATDBailiff marks content changes as SATD_CHANGED actions,
though its Java parser dependency and limitations with multiple SATDs in the same method affect adaptability and
accuracy. Addressing these limitations, Sheikhaei et al. proposed SATD Tracker [33], which enhances SATD tracking by
storing and updating the current location (file and line number) of all detected SATDs through all commits. It uses the
diff between every consecutive pair of commits to track detected SATDs until they are deleted or persist to the last
commit. In this paper, we use the SATD Tracker because it can be applied to any programming language and is much
faster than SATDBailiff, as it does not require a parser to track SATD locations.
2.3 Benchmarking LLMs on SE Tasks
LLMs have been successfully employed in different Software Engineering (SE) tasks. Hou et al. [ 14] conducted a
systematic literature review on LLM4SE by studying 229 research papers from 2017 to 2024. They reported that the
existing studies covered six stages of software engineering from requirement to software maintenance and management.
Software development leads with approximately 56.6%, and focuses on tasks such as code generation, code completion,
code translation, and API documentation. Chen et al. notably posed HumanEval to validate the functional correctness
of generated code by creating a set of manually curated problems [8]. Cassano et al. amplified HumanEval to create
MultiPL-E for code translation [5]. Software maintenance follows by 22.7%, with tasks like program repair, code clone
detection, and debugging that help maintain code quality over time. Software quality assurance represents 15.1%,
supporting tasks such as vulnerability detection, test generation, and defect detection to enhance testing processes.
Requirements engineering constitutes roughly 3.9%, addressing tasks such as requirement classification and traceability
automation to improve requirements analysis. Software design covers around 0.9%, with tasks like rapid prototyping
and GUI retrieval, though this area is less explored. Finally, software management represents approximately 0.7%,
including tasks like effort estimation and tool configuration, showing potential for aiding in project planning and
resource management.
3 Empirical Study Design
In this section, we present our approach to addressing the proposed four research questions.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
3.1 RQ1- Can we build a benchmark for automated SATD repayment that is more representative and less
noisy?
To create a SATD repayment dataset from real-world projects, we build upon the methodology of Mastropaolo et
al. [23]. Similar to them, we select GitHub repositories that meet the following criteria: at least 500 commits, 10
contributors, 10 stars, and no forks.To identify repositories that meet these criteria, we use SEART [11], a tool capable of
retrieving metadata for GitHub repositories based on commonly used selection criteria. Unlike Mastropaolo et al., who
focused exclusively on Java repositories and relied on SATDBailiff for SATD extraction, we adopt SATD Tracker [33], a
language-independent tool, to extract SATD items along with their lifespan from the main branches of both Python and
Java repositories on GitHub.
Once SATD items were extracted from the target repositories, Mastropaolo et al. [23] applied eight filtering steps to
create a clean dataset of SATD repayments. We follow their approach and include these eight filtering steps in our
pipeline. The steps are as follows:
(1) The SATD should have been deleted, indicating a possibility of SATD repayment. Based on the commit
in which the SATD is deleted, we extract the code before and after the SATD removal.
(2) The SATD should consist of three or more words. Short SATDs such as “// TODO" do not provide enough
description for the models to automatically repay them.
(3) The SATD should be defined inside a method or immediately above it. Addressing class-level or file-level
SATD is more challenging than method-level SATD because a broader range of code needs to be processed and
edited to repay them. Since Mastropaolo et al. reported that automated SATD repayment is a challenging task
even for method-level SATDs, we focus on method-level SATDs and leave class-level and file-level SATDs for
future work.
(4) The containing method’s name still exists after repayment. This constraint ensures that the SATD removal
is not due to method or class removal. Zampetti et al. [39] discovered that 33% to 63% of method-level SATD
removals resulted in a code change, meaning the containing method was updated. For the remaining instances,
removal was due to class deletion, method deletion, or SATD comment removal while leaving the method code
unchanged.
(5) The containing method is updated after repayment. This constraint filters out items where the SATD
comment is removed without modifying the code.
(6) Remove duplicates. Based on the input (the method that includes the SATD) and the output (the method in
which the SATD no longer exists), we remove duplicates.
(7) Remove items containing non-ASCII letters. This eliminates items with non-English comments.
(8) Remove items where the number of tokens before or after SATD repayment exceeds 1,024.As models are
restricted by their input/output window size, this is a common practice in the software engineering literature [20,
23].
Although the filtering steps described above are necessary to create a dataset of SATD repayments, they are not
sufficient to produce a clean dataset. The first issue is that there could be multiple SATDs in the input code, or there
may exist some SATDs in the output code. Having multiple SATDs in the input code makes it difficult to distinguish
which code updates are related to which SATD removal. Additionally, the presence of SATDs in the output code raises
the suspicion that the input SATD is being converted into another SATD, with or without partial repayment. To address
this issue, we add the following filter:
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 9 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 9
• (9) No other SATDs exist in the method before repayment. Also, no SATDs exist in the method after
repayment.
The second issue, as explained in the introduction, is that although the SATD is removed in the specified commit and
the code is updated, we found that in 38 out of 100 randomly selected samples from the Java dataset and 55 out of 100
from the Python dataset, the code updates are not relevant to SATD repayment. Therefore, we add the following filter
as the last step in the pipeline:
• (10) Remove items where the method update is not related to SATD repayment.
To apply this filter, we leverage the Llama-3-70B model and use a zero-shot prompt to detect if the code update is
relevant to SATD repayment. Figure 2 shows our prompt for this filter. In this prompt, we use the Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) approach by asking the model to begin by identifying the code updates in the second version (where the SATD
is removed) compared to the first version (which contains the SATD). Then, the model is asked to check if the code
updates are mainly intended to address the issue mentioned in the SATD comment. We allow the model to answer
“Unclear” if it cannot clearly identify the purpose of the code changes or the SATD comment. Once we receive the
model’s answer, we use a heuristic code to extract the label from the generated response. We treat the “Unclear” label
as “No” to ensure dataset cleanliness.
Prompt Template
Two versions of a method are provided below. The first version contains a Self-Admitted Technical Debt (SATD)
comment, while the SATD comment no longer exists in the second version. Analyze if the code updates in the
second version are related to resolving that SATD, considering the surrounding code context in addition to the
SATD comment itself.
### Version 1:
{containing_method_before_repayment}
### Version 2:
{containing_method_after_repayment}
### SATD comment:
{SATD_comment}
### Consider the following questions in your analysis:
- Shortly explain what specific changes were made in Version 2 compared to Version 1?
- Are these changes mainly proposed to address the issue mentioned in the SATD comment? Please answer
with Yes, No, or Unclear.
Fig. 2. Prompt used in final filtering step to detect relevance of code updates to SATD repayment
To evaluate the effectiveness of this approach, we use the aforementioned manually labeled 100 samples from each
dataset and report the precision, recall, and F1 score of this approach on the “Yes” class for each dataset separately.
The “Yes” class represents the items where the changes after SATD deletion are mainly proposed to address the issue
mentioned in the SATD comment.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
3.2 RQ2- Can we design evaluation metrics that are both effective and interpretable for automated SATD
repayment?
To evaluate the quality of generated code for SATD repayment, we consider three existing evaluation metrics: Exact
Match (EM), BLEU, and CrystalBLEU. EM and BLEU are widely adopted in the software engineering domain for assessing
generated text and code [14]. We also include CrystalBLEU [12], as it, along with EM, was used by Mastropaolo et
al. [23] in their evaluation of automated SATD repayment models.
In the following, we introduce each of these evaluation metrics, identify their limitations, and propose solutions
to address them. We then present our new metric, Line-Level Exact Match on Diff (LEMOD), which overcomes the
shortcomings of the existing approaches. Unlike EM, LEMOD avoids underestimating model performance, and unlike
BLEU and CrystalBLEU, it is intuitive, easy to interpret, and specifically tailored to measure the accuracy of code
changes relevant to SATD repayment.
Exact Match (EM): Given the generated code (a method) for addressing a SATD, if the whole code exactly matches
the ground truth, i.e., the method updated by the developer through a commit, return 1; otherwise, return 0. This
approach is easy to understand, implement, and interpret. The main issue with this method is that it does not score
partial similarities. Even worse, if the difference is just whitespace or a code comment, it treats that as an unmatched
pair. To mitigate this issue, we apply three preprocessing steps to the generated code and the ground truth before
checking for an exact match.
(1) Remove import statements: All import statements should be removed. Since the ground truth is an extracted
method from a Python or Java file and does not contain the lines that import the necessary packages, we need to
remove the import statements from the generated code.
(2) Remove code comments: Code comments, including inline comments, Python Docstrings, and Javadocs, are
removed from generated code and ground truth, as they do not affect program functionality. In addition, when
asked to modify the code, LLMs often add comments or explanations that describe the changes made, which can
bias the performance evaluation.
(3) Reformat the code: Finally, we reformat the code to ensure that whitespace differences do not negatively affect
performance. For Python code, we use the Black package to automatically reformat the code to follow the PEP
8 style guide and ensure consistency across different sources. For Java code, since indentation does not affect
syntax, we simply remove all whitespace.
Once we have applied the above preprocessing steps, the code is ready for exact match checking.
BLEU: The BLEU (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy) score is a metric used to evaluate the quality of machine-translated
text by comparing it to one or more reference translations. It calculates the overlap of n-grams (sequences of words)
between the machine-generated translation and the reference texts, with higher scores indicating greater similarity.
The BLEU score formula is:
BLEU = BP × exp
 𝑁∑︁
𝑛=1
𝑤𝑛 log 𝑝𝑛
!
(1)
where 𝑁 represents the highest n-gram order considered (typically 4, making this BLEU-4 that uses unigrams, bigrams,
trigrams, and four-grams). In this study, we use BLEU-4, with each n-gram order contributing equally (𝑤𝑛 = 0.25). The
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 11 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 11
term 𝑃𝑛 is the precision for the 𝑛-grams, measuring the proportion of 𝑛-grams in the candidate translation that match
those in the reference. A brevity penalty (BP) is applied to penalize overly short translations and is defined as:
BP =
 

1 if 𝑐 > 𝑟
exp 1 − 𝑟
𝑐
 if 𝑐 ≤ 𝑟
(2)
where 𝑐 is the length of the candidate translation, and 𝑟 is the length of the reference translation. This penalty ensures
that translations are not only accurate in terms of content but also similar in length to the reference. The BLEU score
ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating a perfect match.
Before calculating the BLEU score, we remove imports, comments, and docstrings/Javadoc (ICD) to ensure they do
not adversely affect the score.
CrystalBLEU: CrystalBLEU [12] is a modification of the BLEU metric designed to reduce noise caused by trivially
shared n-grams, which often result from the syntactic verbosity and coding conventions of programming languages.
CrystalBLEU addresses this issue by excluding the most common n-grams across the dataset when calculating the
BLEU score. As with BLEU, we remove ICD before calculating CrystalBLEU.
BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff: While BLEU and CrystalBLEU are effective for evaluating text and code similarity,
directly applying these metrics to the entire generated code for SATD repayment may yield misleading results. For
example, as shown in Figure 3, simply removing SATD comments can result in higher similarity scores following the
whole-code based evaluation. In contrast, a solution that aims to address the SATD receives lower similarity scores,
though it may differ from how developers implemented it.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a diff-based evaluation approach. Rather than evaluating the whole code, we
compute the differences (diffs) between the code before repayment and the ground truth, and the code before repayment
and the generated code. We then calculate BLEU or CrystalBLEU scores on these diffs. This method enables us to
focus exclusively on code updates, ignoring unchanged lines that do not contribute to SATD repayment. We refer to
these modified metrics as BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff. To identify inserted and deleted lines, we use the difflib
package [30].
Figure 3 illustrates the two evaluation approaches with an example. The first three rows present the input code
(containing the SATD), the ground truth code (after SATD repayment), and the generated code produced by the Llama-
3.1-70B model using the NoExplain prompt template (ref. Table 1). We also present the original source code and one
after preprocessing. The last two rows display the two code diffs, the reference diff, i.e., the changes between the input
code and the ground truth code, and the candidate diff, i.e., the changes between the input code and the generated code.
The BLEU and CrystalBLEU scores are shown in the corresponding columns. The first two scores for each metric are
computed by applying BLEU and CrystalBLEU to the whole code. Notably, these scores are higher for the input code
than for the generated code, despite the input code not addressing the SATD. In contrast, when BLEU and CrystalBLEU
are applied to the diffs (last two rows), the BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff scores for the generated code are 0.574
and 0.581, respectively. Since the BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff scores for the input code are always zero (due to the
resulting empty string when applying the diff), the generated code consistently achieves a higher score than the input
code. While this table highlights the limitations of BLEU and CrystalBLEU using an extreme example, we will explore
this issue in greater detail in RQ2.
LEMOD: While BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff address the limitations of whole-code matching by focusing on code
changes, their reported values remain difficult to interpret. They rely on complex calculations involving n-gram overlaps
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
Fig. 3. Comparison of BLEU and CrystalBLEU scores on the whole code versus on the diffs.
and brevity penalties, making them less intuitive than simpler metrics like EM. To address this, we propose Line-Level
Exact Match on Diff (LEMOD)-a new evaluation approach that is easier to implement, more interpretable, and still
offers finer-grained insights into SATD repayment quality. In LEMOD, we focus on the line-level changes between
the input code, ground truth, and generated code. The approach computes precision, recall, and F1 score based on the
overlap of modified lines between two code diffs, i.e., reference_diff and candidate_diff.
• reference_diff: set of lines in diff(input_code, ground_truth)
• candidate_diff: set of lines in diff(input_code, generated_code)
• LineP = count(intersection(reference_diff, candidate_diff)) / count(candidate_diff)
• LineR = count(intersection(reference_diff, candidate_diff)) / count(reference_diff)
• LineF = 2 × 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑃 × 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑅 /(𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑃 + 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑅 )
For example, consider the input code (before addressing SATD), ground truth code, and generated code shown in
Figure 3. The computed LEMOD metrics are as follows: LineP = 1/3, LineR = 1/2, and LineF = 0.4, indicating that 33% of
the model’s proposed changes were relevant (precision), 50% of the ground truth changes were captured (recall), and
the overall quality of the updates balances at 0.4 (F1 score).
To check the effectiveness and explainability of these evaluation metrics, we employ four open LLMs (Llama-3.1-
8B-Instruct, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct, Gemma-2-9B-it, and DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Instruct) and one closed model,
GPT4o-mini. The rationale for selecting these models is provided in Section 4.3.
We consider four different prompts for each model:
• Mastropaolo-T2: The second template used by Mastropaolo et al. when employing GPT-3.5, which achieved
higher performance compared to their T1 and T3 templates.
• NoExplain: A template that uses “###” separators for each section of the prompt, instructing the model to
provide only the output code without any explanation.
• CoT1: A chain of thought (CoT) prompt that asks the model to first explain how to resolve the SATD and then
generate the output code. Similar to NoExplain, “###” separators are used for each section of the prompt.
• CoT2: A slight modification of CoT1, designed to test if the performance metrics are robust to minor changes in
the prompt.
These four prompt templates are shown in Table 1.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 13 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 13
Table 1. Zero-shot prompt templates for SATD repayment task
Template name Template structure
Mastropaolo-T2 Perform removal of this SATD: {comment} from this code: {code}
NoExplain How to update the following code to resolve the SATD? No need to explain. Just
provide the updated code.
### Code:
{code}
### SATD comment:
{comment}
### Updated code after SATD repayment:
CoT1 How to update the following code to resolve the SATD?
### Code:
{code}
### SATD comment:
{comment}
### Consider the following questions in your answer:
Shortly explain how to resolve the SATD.
Provide the updated code.
CoT2 How to update the following code to resolve the Self-Admitted Technical Debt (SATD)?
### Code:
{code}
### SATD comment:
{comment}
### Consider the following questions in your answer:
1. Briefly explain how to resolve the SATD.
2. Provide the updated code.
With five models and four prompt templates, we need to test 20 model-template pairs across our two datasets,
resulting in 40 experiments for RQ2. To expedite the tests, we randomly select 1,000 samples from each dataset as our
test set for RQ2.
Since the validity of the exact match (EM) approach is well-established, any effective evaluation measure should
have a high correlation with it. Therefore, we report the correlation between all other metrics and the exact match to
assess their alignment with EM.
3.3 RQ3- Does a cleaner dataset lead to a better performance in automated SATD repayment?
In RQ1, we proposed two novel filtering steps to create a cleaner SATD repayment dataset. In RQ3, we aim to apply
these filters to the Mastropaolo dataset to investigate how a cleaner dataset impacts the performance of LLM-based
automated SATD repayment approaches, using the evaluation metrics defined in RQ2. By reducing the likelihood
of including non-SATD repayments, we hypothesize that the filtered dataset will lead to enhanced performance in
automated SATD repayment tasks.
Mastropaolo et al. evaluated two types of approaches: (1) GPT-3.5-Turbo, with three prompt templates (T1, T2, T3),
and (2) four fine-tuned models (M0 to M3) based on the CodeT5-base model, each trained on different datasets. In
RQ3, we extend their approach by considering both a GPT model without fine-tuning and a fine-tuned model. We
select GPT-4o-mini due to its significantly lower cost compared to GPT-3.5-Turbo and its superior performance across
multiple benchmarks3. Experiments are conducted using GPT-4o-mini on both the original Mastropaolo testing dataset
3See https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
and its cleaned version. Furthermore, based on our RQ2 findings with the Java dataset, i.e., our NoExplain template
outperformed their best-performing template T2, we adopt the NoExplain template for this experiment.
For the fine-tuned model, we select the M1 approach for its simplicity but replace CodeT5-base with CodeT5p-770m,
a larger and more advanced model. To assess the impact of using a cleaner training and testing dataset, we fine-tune
CodeT5p-770m on the filtered training set of the Mastropaolo dataset and evaluate it on the corresponding filtered
test set. Since filtering may influence the performance of fine-tuned models, we ensure a fair comparison by creating
controlled training and evaluation sets. These are generated by randomly sampling from the original training and
evaluation data to match the size of the filtered sets.
3.4 RQ4- How do fine-tuned small models compare to prompt-based approaches using large LLMs for
automated SATD repayment?
Mastropaolo et al. reported that fine-tuning smaller models outperformed prompt-based LLMs. However, this conclusion
may not hold due to the presence of non-SATD repayments in their dataset and the limitations of the evaluation metrics
they used. Additionally, it remains unclear whether this performance trend generalizes to other programming languages,
such as Python. Therefore, in RQ4, we revisit this comparison using our newly created benchmarks (Java and Python
datasets) and the improved evaluation metrics introduced in RQ2.
To implement the prompt-based approach, we evaluate the same five LLMs previously considered in RQ2. For each
model, we select the best-performing prompt template based on its performance across four evaluation metrics: EM,
BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LineF1 (measured using LEMOD). When there is a conflict, i.e., where BLEU-diff and
CrystalBLEU-diff favor one template, while EM and LineF1 favor another, we resolve this by prioritizing the template
preferred by EM and LineF1, given their complementary nature and interpretability.
For the fine-tuning-based approach, we use the CodeT5p family [37], an enhanced version of the original CodeT5
model used in Mastropaolo’s study. Released in October 2023, CodeT5p (CodeT5+) incorporates additional pretraining
tasks, such as span denoising, causal language modeling, contrastive learning, and text-code matching, allowing it to
learn richer representations. While Mastropaolo et al. used only the base variant (220 million parameters), we expand
the investigation to include two CodeT5p variants: the 220-million and the 770-million parameter models, enabling us
to analyze the impact of model size on SATD repayment performance.
Since fine-tuning requires training data, we split each dataset (Java and Python) into training, validation, and test sets
using a repository-wise split to avoid data leakage. Specifically, we randomly allocate 85% of repositories to the training
set, 5% to the validation set, and 10% to the test set. This approach ensures that no code from the same repository
appears in multiple subsets, preserving the integrity of the evaluation. Table 2 summarizes the number of SATD samples
allocated to each subset for the two datasets. To evaluate the prompt-based approaches, we use only the test portion of
each dataset.
Table 2. Number of SATD samples in training, validation, and test sets for each dataset
Train Validation Test Overall
Python dataset 50,075 2,902 5,745 58,722
Java dataset 83,211 5,123 9,013 97,347
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 15 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 15
4 Study Setup
In this section, we summarize the study setup for the experiments involved in addressing four RQs.
4.1 Datasets
In this study, we follow the approach introduced in RQ1 to create two SATD repayment datasets: one for Python and
one for Java. These two datasets are employed in RQ2 and RQ4. For RQ3, we use the Mastropaolo dataset. Table 3
presents basic statistics for the three datasets. Although the number of processed repositories in our Java dataset is
approximately ten times greater than in the Mastropaolo dataset, the number of identified SATD repayment samples is
nearly twenty times higher than in the Mastropaolo dataset, primarily due to their failure to process large repositories.
Table 3. Basic statistics of the Maldonado dataset and our Java and Python datasets
Total Number SATD Processed Repositories having
number of repayment repositories at least one SATD
of SATDs filters samples in the filtered dataset
Our Python dataset 1,607,408 10 58,722 13,748 7,219
Our Java dataset 2,672,485 10 97,347 7,694 5,181
Mastropaolo dataset (Java) Unknown 8 5,039 809 596
4.2 Evaluation Metrics
In RQ2, we introduce three metrics for evaluating SATD repayment: EM, BLEU, and CrystalBLEU. Additionally, we
present modified versions of these metrics, i.e., BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff, to address issues identified with BLEU
and CrystalBLEU. Moreover, we introduce a new evaluation metric, Line-Level Exact Match on Diff (LEMOD). LEMOD
provides a finer-grained evaluation by reporting precision, recall, and F1 score based on line-level comparisons of code
diffs, offering greater interpretability and ease of implementation compared to BLEU and CrystalBLEU. We report
results across all six metrics to enable a comprehensive comparison and analysis of evaluation metrics. For RQ3 and
RQ4, we focus on four key metrics: EM, BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD, as these metrics provide a balanced
evaluation of correctness, code similarity, and the quality of generated updates.
4.3 Selected Large Language Models
To select the large language models for our research questions, we referred to the Chatbot Arena leaderboard [6]. At
the time we were cleaning the dataset (RQ1), the best-performing open LLM was Llama-3-70B-Instruct. Therefore,
we used that model to apply the last step of our filtering pipeline.
For prompt-based SATD repayment (RQ2 to RQ4), we selected these five models according to their high scores in the
Chatbot Arena leaderboard (as of July 31, 2024):
• GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18: This model, along with GPT-4o-2024-05-13 and Claude 3.5 Sonnet, ranked first in
the Chatbot Arena leaderboard. As GPT-4o-mini provides the lowest API price, we selected it as the proprietary
model in our experiments.
• Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct: Ranked first among open models in the Chatbot Arena (Code section).
• Gemma-2-9B-it: Ranked first among open models with less than 10 billion parameters in the Chatbot Arena
(Code section).
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
• Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct: Ranked second among open models with less than 10 billion parameters in the Chatbot
Arena (Code section).
• DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Instruct: A model specifically created for coding. We use the Lite version to be able
to run it on our infrastructure.
For the fine-tuning experiments in RQ3 and RQ4, we use models from the CodeT5p family (also known as CodeT5+),
which is an enhanced version of the original CodeT5 models employed by Mastropaolo et al. [23].
4.4 Implementation
For all LLMs under study, we downloaded their official checkpoints from Hugging Face and used the default 16-bit or
32-bit precision mode for inference. An exception was made for the Llama-3-70B-Instruct model (used in RQ1), where
we employed its quantized AWQ version to enable it to run on a single Nvidia RTX A6000 GPU with 48 GB of VRAM.
All other experiments were conducted on a single A6000 GPU, except for the Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct model, which
required four A6000 GPUs for execution.
To fine-tune the CodeT5p models, we utilized the replication package provided by Mastropaolo et al. [23]. To optimize
performance, we experimented with different learning rates while keeping all other hyperparameters unchanged.
Based on these experiments, we selected the best-performing learning rates: 1e-5 for CodeT5p-220m and 5e-6 for
CodeT5p-770m, which were used for reporting the final results.
For prompt-based experiments, we utilized vLLM [15], an open-source, high-performance inference engine for serving
large language models. vLLM optimizes memory usage and inference speed by batching prompts, ensuring efficient
execution. To ensure deterministic outputs and enhance reproducibility, we set the temperature to 0, guaranteeing
that identical inputs produce consistent outputs. The maximum output length (max_tokens) was set to 2,048 tokens,
allowing the models sufficient room to generate complete answers.
5 Results and Analysis
5.1 RQ1 Can we build a benchmark for automated SATD repayment that is more representative and less
noisy?
Table 4 summarizes the statistics for each step in our data creation process. Using the SEART tool, we identified 14,097
Python repositories and 7,982 Java repositories that met our selection criteria. The SATD Tracker tool successfully
processed 97.5% of the Python projects and 96.4% of the Java projects, with the remaining repositories excluded due
to failures in a third-party Python package for parsing Git diff outputs. We detected 1,059,299 SATD items in Python
repositories and 2,672,485 in Java repositories. Rows 4–13 in the table outline our 10-step filtering approach to create a
clean dataset of SATD repayments, with two newly proposed filtering steps highlighted in rows 9 and 13.
We ended up with 58,722 and 97,347 SATD repayment samples for Python and Java, respectively. For each sample,
the dataset provides various information, including the GitHub user, the project (repository name), the file path that
contains the SATD, the creation commit and deletion commit of the SATD, the line number of the SATD when it was
created, and also its line number just before the deletion commit. Using this information, for all extracted SATD items
that have a deletion commit, we processed the containing file in the deletion commit and its parent to extract the
containing_method_before_repayment and containing_method_after_repayment fields. The first one is used as
the input for the LLMs, and the second one is used as the ground truth in our experiments for RQ2 to RQ4. In RQ1,
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 17 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 17
Table 4. Dataset creation process for Python and Java: SATD extraction (rows 1–3) and filtering pipeline (rows 4–13)
Row Our dataset creation steps Python Java
1 Repositories having at least 500 commits, 10 contributors, 10 stars, and not being forked14,097 7,982
2 Number of repositories that our SATD-Tracker successfully extracted SATDs 13,748 (97.5%) 7,694 (96.4%)
3 Total number of SATDs 1,607,408 2,672,485
4 Number of SATDs that are deleted (potentially repaid) 1,059,299 1,847,392
5 Number of SATDs after removing those with length of two or less words 949,188 1,623,408
6 Number of SATDs that are inside methods 723,258 1,216,775
7 The containing method’s name still exist after repayment 325,031 507,287
8 The containing method is updated after repayment 288,007 423,915
9 No other SATDs existed in that method before repayment. Also, no SATD exists in the
method after repayment.
171,825 275,883
10 Number of SATDs after removing duplicates 143,341 199,219
11 Number of SATDs after removing those having non-ASCII 140,929 196,741
12 The number of tokens in before and after SATD repayment is less than 1,024 131,945 187,380
13 Use LLM to remove items that the method update is not related to SATD repayment 58,722 97,347
Table 5. Evaluation of our approach in identifying items whose code updates are related to SATD repayment (“Yes” category)
Dataset #items in Yes category Model Precision Recall F1
Python 45 out of 100 TechxGenus/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct-AWQ 0.830 0.867 0.848
GPT4 (baseline) 0.800 0.978 0.880
Java 62 out of 100 TechxGenus/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct-AWQ 0.926 0.806 0.862
GPT4 (baseline) 0.881 0.952 0.915
to apply the last filtering step, we provided both fields and asked the model to determine if the changes made in the
second code address the issue mentioned in the SATD comment.
Table 5 presents the precision, recall, and F1 score of our LLM-based approach for identifying code updates related to
SATD repayment, evaluated using 200 manually labeled candidate SATD repayments prior to applying the filtering step
(see Section 4). While we used the Llama-3-70B-Instruct model to filter the entire dataset in RQ1, we also tested GPT-4
as a baseline on the same manually labeled dataset, using the same prompt as for the Llama-3 model. As shown in
Table 5, GPT-4 achieves a higher F1 score across both datasets. However, the Llama-3 model exhibits higher precision, a
critical factor for generating a clean dataset. Thus, our final dataset for RQ2–RQ4 was collected using the Llama-3-based
filtering approach.
RQ1 Summary: Using our SATD Tracker tool, we successfully extracted SATDs from 97.5% of the targeted Python repositories
and 96.4% of the targeted Java repositories. These success rates are significantly higher than the 12% success rate reported
in the previous study by Mastropaolo et al. Our LLM-based approach, utilizing the quantized Llama-3-70B model, achieved
an F1 score of 0.848 for Python and 0.862 for Java in identifying true SATD repayment samples, resulting in a less noisy
dataset.
5.2 RQ2 Can we design evaluation metrics that are both effective and interpretable for automated SATD
repayment?
Table 6 presents the BLEU and CrystalBLEU scores achieved by five LLMs on two sampled test sets, each containing
1,000 SATD repayments per programming language, evaluated using four distinct prompt templates and the whole-code
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
Table 6. BLEU and CrystalBLEU scores for five models each with four prompt templates on two datasets, compared to baseline input
code (red underlined values < baseline)
Python Java
Model Prompt BLEU CrystalBLEU BLEU CrystalBLEU
Template WholeCode WholeCode WholeCode WholeCode
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct Mastropaolo-T2 0.657 0.702 0.572 0.610
NoExplain 0.650 0.704 0.580 0.635
CoT1 0.627 0.688 0.521 0.578
CoT2 0.625 0.687 0.515 0.572
Gemma-2-9B-it Mastropaolo-T2 0.669 0.714 0.585 0.632
NoExplain 0.624 0.675 0.583 0.636
CoT1 0.511 0.573 0.469 0.528
CoT2 0.513 0.575 0.483 0.541
DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Instruct Mastropaolo-T2 0.658 0.699 0.572 0.604
NoExplain 0.657 0.714 0.582 0.627
CoT1 0.634 0.693 0.559 0.601
CoT2 0.624 0.685 0.539 0.584
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct Mastropaolo-T2 0.643 0.698 0.543 0.583
NoExplain 0.666 0.723 0.572 0.621
CoT1 0.590 0.649 0.496 0.543
CoT2 0.594 0.653 0.496 0.545
GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18 Mastropaolo-T2 0.660 0.706 0.564 0.597
NoExplain 0.673 0.730 0.595 0.642
CoT1 0.653 0.713 0.550 0.590
CoT2 0.642 0.701 0.540 0.581
Use the input code (after removing ICD) as a baseline 0.656 0.695 0.564 0.611
based evaluation method. When comparing the scores of LLM-generated responses to the baseline (where the input
code, after removing the ICD, is used as the generated code, i.e., ignoring the SATD comment rather than addressing
it), we observe that most LLM-generated scores (48 out of 80 experiments) fall below the baseline. This observation
aligns with the demonstration example in Figure 3 and the hypothesis outlined in Section 3.2. In the few instances
where LLM-generated scores surpass the baseline, the difference is minimal—less than 0.03, indicating only a marginal
improvement. These findings confirm that measuring BLEU and CrystalBLEU based on the entire code is not suitable
for evaluating automated SATD repayment.
Tables 7 and 8 summarize the performance of 20 experiments (five models with four prompt templates) conducted
on the Python and Java datasets, respectively. Each model-prompt combination is evaluated using four metrics: EM,
BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD. LEMOD further provides line-level precision (LineP), recall (LineR), and F1
(LineF1) scores. The last three metrics are newly proposed in this study.
As described in Section 3.2, since EM is intuitively a reliable metric for evaluating SATD repayment, we assess the
effectiveness of all other metrics, including BLEU and CrystalBLEU, by calculating their correlation with EM. Table 9
presents the results of this correlation analysis. While BLEU and CrystalBLEU show minimal correlation with EM, all
three of our proposed metrics exhibit a high correlation with it, indicating strong alignment with this intuitive metric.
Among these, LineF1 achieves the highest correlation with EM.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 19 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 19
Table 7. EM, BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD scores for five models each with four prompts on the Python dataset. For
each metric, the maximum score across four prompts is bolded, and the maximum value across all 20 experiments is underlined.
Model Prompt Avg del. Avg ins. Exact BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
Template lines lines Match diff diff LineP LineR LineF1
Llama-3.1-8B Mastropaolo-T2 1.9 3.0 5.1 0.146 0.176 0.203 0.158 0.158
-Instruct NoExplain 3.2 4.5 7.7 0.298 0.360 0.387 0.306 0.306
CoT1* 6.2 6.0 9.1 0.336 0.411 0.383 0.360 0.329
CoT2 7.3 5.6 7.1 0.333 0.419 0.365 0.367 0.324
Gemma-2-9B Mastropaolo-T2 1.6 3.1 7.3 0.198 0.226 0.293 0.205 0.216
-it NoExplain* 2.5 7.9 9.9 0.314 0.369 0.411 0.324 0.321
CoT1 6.6 12.0 6.4 0.316 0.391 0.341 0.397 0.315
CoT2 6.4 12.2 6.8 0.316 0.390 0.345 0.392 0.315
DeepSeek- Mastropaolo-T2 1.0 2.4 3.8 0.094 0.109 0.140 0.103 0.104
Coder-V2- NoExplain 3.9 3.4 5.6 0.256 0.321 0.315 0.257 0.252
Lite-Instruct CoT1* 7.7 4.5 7.7 0.296 0.368 0.328 0.331 0.290
CoT2 8.5 4.7 5.8 0.287 0.364 0.313 0.339 0.281
Llama-3.1-70B Mastropaolo-T2 5.2 5.4 10.5 0.328 0.393 0.373 0.350 0.325
-Instruct NoExplain* 5.9 4.7 10.0 0.378 0.454 0.419 0.402 0.373
CoT1 6.4 9.2 10.0 0.362 0.440 0.382 0.412 0.351
CoT2 7.0 8.6 9.7 0.361 0.436 0.380 0.414 0.351
GPT-4o-mini Mastropaolo-T2 2.5 2.7 5.1 0.152 0.187 0.183 0.159 0.153
-2024-07-18 NoExplain 4.3 4.6 9.2 0.341 0.415 0.394 0.342 0.333
CoT1* 7.8 5.2 9.6 0.358 0.437 0.376 0.386 0.342
CoT2 8.6 5.5 9.3 0.347 0.427 0.358 0.379 0.330
A possible question on this topic might be if EM is the most intuitive metric, why do we need the other metrics?
To answer this, let’s examine Table 7 more closely. As noted earlier, we created two slightly different prompts, CoT1
and CoT2, to test how a small change in the prompt might impact our evaluation. Ideally, a robust evaluation metric
should report similar values for both prompts. However, as shown in Table 7, for Llama-3.1-8B and DeepSeek-Coder,
there is a significant discrepancy between the values reported by Exact Match. In contrast, the other metrics remain
more consistent, demonstrating their greater robustness compared to EM. Furthermore, because Exact Match does not
account for the similarity between the two code outputs, it is not a suitable metric for assessing SATD items that are
difficult to address. In such cases, EM is inadequate for determining which model has a better performance in SATD
repayment. To conclude, while EM is a reliable measure for evaluating SATD repayment, it is not as robust as the other
three metrics and cannot provide a similarity score for cases where the models fail to produce a fully matched answer.
In addition to the metrics discussed, Tables 7 and 8 also show the average number of deleted and inserted lines for
each method. As expected, when using chain-of-thought prompts (CoT1 and CoT2), all models tend to make more
changes to the code, either by deleting or inserting/updating lines. However, this increased code manipulation does not
lead to a consistent improvement across all models and metrics when using the chain-of-thought approach. In fact, for
both datasets, the highest score for each metric across all models and prompts (underlined values in Tables 7 and 8) is
achieved by the NoExplain prompt, with the exception of Exact Match in the Python dataset, where Mastropaolo-T2
achieves the highest value.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
Table 8. EM, BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD scores for five models each with four prompts on the Java dataset. For each
metric, the maximum score across four prompts is bolded, and the maximum value across all 20 experiments is underlined.
Model Prompt Avg del. Avg ins. Exact BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
Template lines lines Match diff diff LineP LineR LineF1
Llama-3.1-8B Mastropaolo-T2 2.2 2.5 3.6 0.180 0.216 0.333 0.236 0.233
-Instruct NoExplain* 4.4 3.5 5.7 0.291 0.355 0.408 0.348 0.336
CoT1 7.3 5.5 5.4 0.297 0.374 0.365 0.400 0.335
CoT2 8.7 5.1 5.3 0.292 0.372 0.342 0.404 0.323
Gemma-2-9B Mastropaolo-T2 1.8 2.6 5.8 0.173 0.199 0.333 0.199 0.219
-it NoExplain* 2.7 4.1 8.8 0.278 0.335 0.468 0.328 0.341
CoT1 7.6 8.3 5.8 0.294 0.371 0.348 0.422 0.332
CoT2 7.4 7.9 5.8 0.298 0.371 0.353 0.414 0.335
DeepSeek- Mastropaolo-T2 1.3 2.5 3.7 0.141 0.163 0.238 0.185 0.174
Coder-V2- NoExplain 4.0 3.7 6.2 0.263 0.327 0.390 0.338 0.313
Lite-Instruct CoT1* 7.6 4.4 5.7 0.287 0.356 0.362 0.394 0.327
CoT2 9.4 4.6 5.4 0.282 0.354 0.329 0.404 0.314
Llama-3.1-70B Mastropaolo-T2 5.4 5.1 7.1 0.279 0.335 0.393 0.369 0.326
-Instruct NoExplain* 5.6 4.5 7.4 0.308 0.382 0.389 0.408 0.352
CoT1 8.2 7.6 7.6 0.307 0.380 0.355 0.430 0.341
CoT2 8.3 7.5 7.2 0.302 0.376 0.348 0.434 0.338
GPT-4o-mini Mastropaolo-T2 3.2 2.5 2.9 0.191 0.229 0.324 0.253 0.235
-2024-07-18 NoExplain* 4.5 3.8 8.7 0.311 0.380 0.438 0.386 0.365
CoT1 9.4 4.5 7.4 0.294 0.366 0.344 0.437 0.335
CoT2 10.1 4.7 7.2 0.293 0.363 0.331 0.439 0.330
Table 9. Correlation between Exact Match and other metrics
BLEU CrystalBLEU BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
WholeCode WholeCode diff diff LineF1
Python dataset 0.007 0.076 0.827 0.788 0.837
Java dataset 0.004 0.081 0.693 0.653 0.748
Our LEMOD metric reports three values for each method: LineP, LineR, and LineF1. In both datasets, for each
model, the NoExplain prompt achieves the highest LineP, while the two CoT prompts yield the highest LineR. The only
exception is in the Python dataset when we use DeepSeek-Coder, where CoT1 achieves a slightly higher LineP than the
NoExplain prompt.
Since the Mastropaolo-T2 template achieves the lowest values for most metrics and models (38 out of 40), incorporating
“###” separators in prompts is a good practice to help models better distinguish between different parts of a prompt.
Among the five models studied, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct is the most robust, meaning that the choice of prompt approach
has the least effect on its results compared to the other models.
As explained earlier, we use the results from this research question to select the best prompt for each model, which
will be used in RQ3 and RQ4. The selected prompt for each model is marked with an asterisk (*).
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 21 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 21
Table 10. Number of instances in the Mastropaolo dataset before and after our new filters
Part Original dataset Filtered dataset
Train 3,537 1,391
Evaluation 502 210
Test 1,000 386
Table 11. Performance comparison of models using the original and filtered Mastropaolo dataset
Model Approach Test Exact BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
dataset Match diff diff LineF1
GPT-4o-mini NoExplain prompt template original Mastropaolo 4.6 0.228 0.289 0.231
GPT-4o-mini NoExplain prompt template filtered Mastropaolo 7.5 0.276 0.344 0.266
CodeT5p-770m Fine-tune on controlled Mastropaolo filtered Mastropaolo 4.7 0.194 0.247 0.220
CodeT5p-770m Fine-tune on filtered Mastropaolo filtered Mastropaolo 6.2 0.201 0.250 0.226
RQ2 Summary: While applying BLEU or CrystalBLEU to the entire code for evaluating generated code in SATD repayment
results in unpredictable values, our proposed modified versions, BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff, yield significantly more
accurate and explainable results. Additionally, our newly proposed evaluation metric, LEMOD, offers even greater detail
while maintaining strong alignment with EM, BLEU-diff, and CrystalBLEU-diff.
5.3 RQ3 Does a cleaner dataset lead to a better performance in automated SATD repayment?
Table 10 summarizes the number of instances in the Mastropaolo dataset before and after applying the two new filters
introduced in RQ1. Approximately 60% of the items are removed through this filtering process. Table 11 compares the
performance of two approaches on the original and filtered Mastropaolo datasets.
In the first approach, GPT-4o-mini paired with the NoExplain prompt achieves significantly higher results across
all four metrics on the filtered dataset compared to the original dataset. In the second approach, fine-tuning the
CodeT5p-770m model on the filtered training data yields consistently better performance across all four metrics than
fine-tuning on the controlled set, which contains 1,391 randomly sampled instances from the original training data.
These findings highlight the effectiveness of filtering SATD repayment datasets in improving performance for both
prompt-based LLMs and those undergoing continuous training, i.e., fine-tuning.
RQ3 Summary: Applying our proposed filters to the Mastropaolo dataset results in a cleaner dataset, which enhances
performance in LLM-based automated SATD repayment, whether through prompt engineering or fine-tuning a model.
5.4 RQ4 How do fine-tuned small models compare to prompt-based approaches using large LLMs for
automated SATD repayment?
Tables 12 and 13 summarize the performance of the five prompt-based methods and the two fine-tuned models on the
Python and Java test sets.
The results show that Gemma-2-9B consistently achieves the highest Exact Match (EM) scores across both datasets,
with 10.1% on the Python data and 8.1% on the Java data. These scores are significantly higher than the 1.19% reported
by Mastropaolo et al. for the best-performing prompt-based model. As for the fine-grained evaluation, for the Python
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
Table 12. Performance of the five prompt-based methods and the two fine-tuned models on the Python test set (5,745 items)
Model Prompt Exact BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
Template Match diff diff LineP LineR LineF1
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct CoT1 8.2 0.333 0.403 0.380 0.355 0.327
Gemma-2-9B-it NoExplain 10.1 0.326 0.381 0.419 0.339 0.336
DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Instruct CoT1 7.2 0.291 0.360 0.328 0.328 0.288
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct NoExplain 8.9 0.376 0.448 0.419 0.391 0.368
GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18 CoT1 9.4 0.356 0.431 0.382 0.382 0.344
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-220m-py N/A 9.2 0.214 0.248 0.307 0.233 0.236
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-770m-py N/A 9.7 0.255 0.295 0.356 0.271 0.275
Table 13. Performance of the five prompt-based methods and the two fine-tuned models on the Java test set (9,013 items)
Model Prompt Exact BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
Template Match diff diff LineP LineR LineF1
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct NoExplain 5.6 0.282 0.345 0.402 0.342 0.326
Gemma-2-9B-it NoExplain 8.1 0.274 0.325 0.463 0.325 0.335
DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Instruct CoT1 4.7 0.267 0.334 0.338 0.374 0.306
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct NoExplain 5.9 0.308 0.379 0.384 0.404 0.346
GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18 NoExplain 7.3 0.309 0.376 0.417 0.374 0.351
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-220m N/A 6.7 0.227 0.284 0.395 0.287 0.287
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-770m N/A 7.6 0.249 0.309 0.411 0.305 0.305
dataset, Llama-3.1-70B demonstrates the best performance across BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LineF1, reflecting
its superior ability to capture nuanced changes and maintain line-level accuracy. For the Java dataset, GPT-4o-mini and
Llama-3.1-70B perform comparably, outperforming other models in BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LineF1.
For the fine-tuned models, leveraging a large training dataset allows smaller models to achieve EM scores comparable
to those of prompt-based models. The best-performing fine-tuned model, Fine-tuned CodeT5p-770M(-py), achieves
an EM of 9.7% on the Python test set and 7.6% on the Java test set, significantly surpassing the 2.3% EM reported by
Mastropaolo et al. for their best fine-tuned model. However, for the other three metrics, i.e., BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff,
and LineF1, a noticeable performance gap remains. This gap is somewhat reduced when leveraging the 770M base
model, but it is still significant.
In the above results, we do not differentiate SATD items based on their difficulty level. However, LLM performance
may vary significantly between easy-to-address and hard-to-address SATD items. Understanding how different LLMs
perform on these two groups can offer deeper insights into their strengths and limitations. To explore this, we conduct
a follow-up analysis comparing the performance of LLMs on both groups. The datasets are categorized into easy and
hard groups based on the following definitions:
• Easy-to-address SATD: An item where, in the diff between the input code and the ground truth, at most two
lines are inserted.
• Hard-to-address SATD: An item where, in the diff between the input code and the ground truth, at least three
lines are inserted.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 23 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 23
The number of deleted lines is not considered, as deleting lines is generally less challenging than inserting new ones.
Based on these criteria, 43.3% of the Python dataset and 48.6% of the Java dataset are classified as easy-to-address SATD
items. Tables 14 and 15 present the scores on easy and hard groups, along with those on the whole test set.
Table 14. Performance of models on each subset of the Python test set (easy: 43.3%, hard: 56.7%)
Model Prompt Subset Exact BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
Template Match diff diff LineP LineR LineF1
easy 7.5 0.459 0.519 0.454 0.516 0.447
Llama3.1-8B CoT1 hard 0.7 0.236 0.315 0.324 0.233 0.235
all 8.2 0.333 0.403 0.380 0.355 0.327
easy 9.1 0.480 0.537 0.509 0.515 0.482
Gemma-2-9B NoExplain hard 1.0 0.208 0.262 0.350 0.205 0.225
all 10.1 0.326 0.381 0.419 0.339 0.336
easy 6.5 0.383 0.438 0.388 0.466 0.386
DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Inst. CoT1 hard 0.7 0.220 0.300 0.281 0.222 0.213
all 7.2 0.291 0.360 0.328 0.328 0.288
easy 8.1 0.512 0.575 0.497 0.572 0.502
Llama3.1-70B NoExplain hard 0.8 0.271 0.352 0.359 0.253 0.265
all 8.9 0.376 0.448 0.419 0.391 0.368
easy 8.5 0.471 0.526 0.463 0.550 0.466
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 CoT1 hard 0.9 0.269 0.358 0.321 0.254 0.250
all 9.4 0.356 0.431 0.382 0.382 0.344
easy 8.4 0.357 0.393 0.410 0.388 0.375
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-220m-py N/A hard 0.8 0.105 0.137 0.229 0.115 0.130
all 9.2 0.214 0.248 0.307 0.233 0.236
easy 9.0 0.416 0.459 0.452 0.443 0.424
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-770m-py N/A hard 0.7 0.131 0.170 0.283 0.140 0.161
all 9.7 0.255 0.295 0.356 0.271 0.275
As expected, across all approaches considered, the majority of the EM score (over 90%) originates from the easy-
to-address group, even though more than half of the SATD items are classified as hard-to-address. However, for the
other three metrics, all models achieve scores from both groups, although their scores in the easy group are higher
than in the hard group. In other words, while EM predominantly reflects performance on the easy group, the other
three metrics are influenced by both groups. Consequently, using EM as a performance metric for the hard group
is not recommended, as the scores are typically very low (often below 1%), making them highly sensitive to minor
variations. For instance, correctly addressing just a few additional items by chance can disproportionately influence
model rankings. A clear example of this issue is observed with CodeT5p-770m-py, which, despite being over three
times larger than CodeT5p-220m-py, achieves a lower EM score on the hard group in the Python dataset—an outcome
that defies logical expectations. The alternative fine-grained metrics provide a more reliable and rational distinction in
performance between these two models.
According to the above analysis, we use all four metrics to measure effectiveness on the easy group, and the three
fine-grained metrics for the hard group. The best performing model for each group and metric combination is highlighted
in Tables 14 and 15. On the Python dataset’s easy group, Llama3.1-70B with the NoExplain prompt achieves the highest
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
Table 15. Performance of models on each subset of the Java test set (easy: 48.6%, hard: 51.4%)
Model Prompt Subset Exact BLEU CrystalBLEU LEMOD
Template Match diff diff LineP LineR LineF1
easy 5.1 0.372 0.445 0.427 0.468 0.411
Llama3.1-8B NoExplain hard 0.5 0.196 0.249 0.379 0.223 0.245
all 5.6 0.282 0.345 0.402 0.342 0.326
easy 7.4 0.398 0.463 0.509 0.471 0.454
Gemma-2-9B NoExplain hard 0.6 0.156 0.195 0.420 0.186 0.221
all 8.1 0.274 0.325 0.463 0.325 0.335
easy 4.3 0.313 0.377 0.348 0.482 0.359
DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Inst. CoT1 hard 0.4 0.224 0.293 0.329 0.272 0.256
all 4.7 0.267 0.334 0.338 0.374 0.306
easy 5.4 0.378 0.449 0.402 0.534 0.417
Llama3.1-70B NoExplain hard 0.5 0.241 0.312 0.366 0.281 0.279
all 5.9 0.308 0.379 0.384 0.404 0.346
easy 6.5 0.400 0.472 0.452 0.502 0.438
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 NoExplain hard 0.8 0.224 0.286 0.383 0.253 0.268
all 7.3 0.309 0.376 0.417 0.374 0.351
easy 6.2 0.321 0.395 0.420 0.413 0.382
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-220m N/A hard 0.5 0.137 0.179 0.370 0.167 0.196
all 6.7 0.227 0.284 0.395 0.287 0.287
easy 7.0 0.351 0.427 0.443 0.442 0.410
Fine-tuned CodeT5p-770m N/A hard 0.6 0.152 0.197 0.379 0.176 0.205
all 7.6 0.249 0.309 0.411 0.305 0.305
scores in three of the four metrics, while Gemma-2-9B attains the best EM score. Notably, Gemma-2-9B surpasses
GPT4o-mini across all four metrics in this easy group. On the hard group of the Python dataset, Llama3.1-70B with
the NoExplain prompt performs best in CrystalBLEU-diff and LineF1, while GPT4o-mini leads in BLEU-diff. For the
Java dataset’s easy group, Gemma-2-9B ranks first in EM and LineF1, second in BLEU-diff and CrystalBLEU-diff, while
GPT4o-mini leads in the latter two metrics. Finally, in the Java dataset’s hard group, Llama3.1-70B outperforms all other
models on all three evaluated metrics. The fine-tuned models, especially CodeT5p-770m, while providing comparable
performance to larger prompt-based models on the easy groups, fall behind by a large margin on the hard groups.
RQ4 Summary: While fine-tuned smaller models achieve the same level of Exact Match as larger models (with prompt
engineering), they lag behind in the other three fine-grained evaluation metrics, highlighting their limitations in addressing
more complex SATDs. Also, the EM score is not recommended for evaluating models in hard-to-address SATDs. The
fine-grained evaluation techniques provide more reliable results.
6 Discussion
6.1 Optimal Performance with an Oracle Template
Prompt engineering is widely recognized as a critical factor in the performance of LLMs [7, 32]. As demonstrated in the
results of RQ2 (ref. Tables 7 and 8), the four prompt templates lead to varying levels of performance, with different
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 25 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 25
Table 16. Performance comparison of oracle template vs. individual prompt templates across models
Model Prompt Template EM in Python EM in Java
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct Mastropaolo-T2 5.1 3.6
NoExplain 7.7 5.7
CoT1 9.1 5.4
CoT2 7.1 5.3
Oracle 12.1 10.0
Gemma-2-9B-it Mastropaolo-T2 7.3 5.8
NoExplain 9.9 8.8
CoT1 6.4 5.8
CoT2 6.8 5.8
Oracle 14.0 10.6
DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Lite-Instruct Mastropaolo-T2 3.8 3.7
NoExplain 5.6 6.2
CoT1 7.7 5.7
CoT2 5.8 5.4
Oracle 11.3 9.3
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct Mastropaolo-T2 10.5 7.1
NoExplain 10.0 7.4
CoT1 10.0 7.6
CoT2 9.7 7.2
Oracle 14.3 11.1
GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18 Mastropaolo-T2 5.1 2.9
NoExplain 9.2 8.7
CoT1 9.6 7.4
CoT2 9.3 7.2
Oracle 12.9 10.6
prompts excelling under different settings. This variability raises an intriguing question: if the best prompt could always
be selected for each scenario, what would the performance of the models be? To explore this potential upper bound
enabled by a mix of prompts, we evaluated the hypothetical scenario of using an oracle template, i.e., a method that
dynamically selects the optimal prompt template for each SATD item.
Table 16 compares the Exact Match scores of models using the oracle template against those achieved with individual
prompt templates. Across all models, the oracle template consistently delivers superior performance, surpassing the
best single prompt template. Remarkably, models like Llama-3.1-8B and DeepSeek-Coder, which otherwise exhibit
the lowest performance, outperform high-performing models such as Llama-3.1-70B and GPT-4o-mini when using
the oracle template. The results indicate that while the single best-performing template addresses most SATD items
handled by the others, certain SATD items are only captured by one or more of the alternative templates. This suggests
that developing a dynamic model capable of selecting the most effective prompt template for each SATD
item could unlock significant improvements in the performance of LLMs for SATD repayment. Exploring
methods to achieve this remains a promising direction for future research.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
6.2 How Well do Models Cover SATD Repayments?
In RQ2, we conducted 20 experiments on each dataset, using five models and four prompt templates. This section
analyzes the results to assess SATD repayment coverage under three settings: (1) Setting #1: SATD repayments are
addressed by all 20 model-template combinations. This examines the sensitivity of SATD repayment success to varying
combinations of LLMs and prompts. (2) Setting #2: SATD repayments are addressed by at least one model-template
combination. This represents an upper bound for SATD repayment if we could always select the best-performing
combination. (Note: This differs from the results in Section 6.1, as it allows the model to vary, whereas the prior section
fixes the LLM.) (3) Setting #3: SATD repayments are addressed by only one model-template combination. This identifies
non-overlapping cases, where only highly specialized model-template combinations can address certain items. Here,
addressed refers to achieving an EM score of 1 for a given SATD item. The results are summarized in Table 17.
Interestingly, only three items in the Python dataset and one item in the Java dataset are addressed by all model-
template combinations (Setting #1). This suggests that SATD repayment success is highly sensitive to the choice
of LLM and prompt . Encouragingly, 195 items (19.5%) in Python and 150 items (15%) in Java are addressed by at
least one model-template combination (Setting #2), indicating promising progress of prompt-based methods
toward practical automated SATD repayment . Finally, 27 items in Python and 20 in Java are addressed by only one
specific model-template combination (Setting #3), highlighting that certain SATD items require highly specialized
approaches (specific prompts/models) for effective handling.
Table 17. SATD repayment coverage in RQ2 (out of 1000 samples)
SATD items that addressed by Python Java
All 20 model-templates 3 1
At least one model-template 195 150
At most one model-template 27 20
6.3 The Chosen of Evaluation Metric(s)
In this study, we utilize four metrics to evaluate automated SATD repayment: EM, BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and
LEMOD. A key question is which metric is most suitable for practical use. To answer this question, we analyze the
correlations among the four metrics using the results from RQ2, as summarized in Table 18.
Table 18. The correlation between four evaluation metrics from the results of RQ2 for Python and Java datasets separately
Python dataset
EM BLEU-diff CrystalBLEU-diff LineF1
EM - 0.827 0.788 0.837
BLEU-diff 0.693 - 0.997 0.996
Java CrystalBLEU-diff 0.653 0.997 - 0.989
dataset LineF1 0.748 0.987 0.976 -
As shown in Table 18, BLEU-diff, CrystalBLEU-diff, and LEMOD-LineF1 exhibit very high correlations (above 0.97) in
both datasets. This suggests that the three metrics produce similar evaluations. However, LEMOD provides additional
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 27 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 27
insights by offering line-level precision (LineP) and recall (LineR) and is generally easier to interpret than BLEU-diff
and CrystalBLEU-diff, making it a more comprehensive choice. In contrast, the EM metric shows moderate correlation
(0.65–0.84) with the other three metrics, as it fundamentally differs in focus. EM measures the proportion of fully
addressed items, which is particularly valuable in scenarios where the generated code must be directly usable without
further refinement. This distinction makes EM a critical complement to the other metrics, especially for applications
emphasizing correctness over partial matches or incremental improvements. Therefore, we recommend using both
EM and LEMOD as a complementary set of metrics for future evaluations of automated SATD repayment.
Together, they balance the strictness of exact matches with the flexibility and detailed insights offered by line-level
evaluations. Lastly, preprocessing plays a vital role in ensuring the accuracy of metric calculations. In this study, we
removed ICD elements (Imports, Comments, and Docstrings/JavaDoc) for all metrics. Additionally, for EM, we applied
specific formatting adjustments, including removing all whitespace for Java and standardizing formatting for Python.
7 Threats to Validity
Internal Validity. In the final step of our filtering pipeline to create a clean dataset, we used the Llama-3-70B-Instruct
model, which achieved a precision of 0.830 for Python and 0.926 for Java. This indicates that the dataset is not completely
clean, as some items with incorrect ground truth remain, potentially negatively affecting the reported performance.
Additionally, due to the model’s less-than-perfect recall, we have missed including some SATDs in our filtered datasets.
These overlooked items are often difficult for models to address, so their exclusion may have led to an overestimation
of our model’s performance. As these two threats counteract each other, they alleviate each other’s impact on our
reported scores.
External Validity. In this study, we focused on within-method SATD repayment. Consequently, the reported perfor-
mance for automated SATD repayment may not generalize to class-level or file-level SATD, as these types can impact
more lines of code and could be more challenging to address. Moreover, our results pertain to SATD in Python and
Java, so they may not generalize to other programming languages. Another threat to external validity is that some of
the filtering steps employed in RQ1 (such as removing SATDs with non-ASCII characters and those with two or fewer
words) reduce the representativeness of our SATD repayment dataset. However, as explained in Section 3.1, these steps
were necessary.
Construct Validity. A common threat to the validity of leveraging recent LLMs, such as Llama, Gemma, and GPT-4o, is
the possibility that they may have already encountered the target code during their pre-training phase, raising concerns
about data leakage. We believe that, although the target code may have appeared in the pre-training data, it is less
likely to have appeared alongside its corresponding input code (that includes the SATD comment) either consecutively
in the pre-training data or as part of a question-answer pair in the instruction fine-tuning data. To the best of our
knowledge, our SATD repayment dataset is the first of its kind for the Python programming language, and our Java
SATD repayment dataset, containing 97,347 items, introduces many new items, even if those LLMs were already trained
on the Mastropaolo dataset, which contains only 5,039 items.
8 Conclusion and Future Work
This work aims to benchmark and understand the effectiveness of LLMs in automating SATD repayment, i.e., addressing
SATDs. To achieve this goal, we identified and resolved three critical challenges in creating benchmarks and evaluation
methods for automated SATD repayment. Our contributions include a novel pipeline for collecting and cleaning SATD
repayments, resulting in the largest and most robust datasets for Python and Java. Additionally, we introduced three
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
new evaluation metrics to address the limitations of existing methods. Leveraging these benchmarks and metrics, we
evaluated the performance of fine-tuning and prompt-based LLMs on this task and demonstrated the positive impact of
cleaner datasets for both approaches.
Our experiments revealed that fine-tuning smaller models with hundreds of millions of parameters lags behind
prompt-based approaches leveraging larger models with billions of parameters. However, fine-tuning outcomes could
be enhanced by employing larger models similar to those used in prompt-based setups. In terms of exact match (EM)
score, the highest achieved by current LLMs is 8.1% on Java SATDs and 10.1% on Python SATDs.
We further explored the potential for improving LLM-based approaches by learning optimal model-prompt combina-
tions and provided guidance for practitioners on selecting the most suitable evaluation metrics. We believe that our
new data preprocessing pipeline, benchmark datasets, and evaluation metrics will enable future research to develop
more effective and scalable solutions for automated SATD repayment.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), [funding
reference number: RGPIN-2019-05071].
References
[1] Eman Abdullah AlOmar, Ben Christians, Mihal Busho, Ahmed Hamad AlKhalid, Ali Ouni, Christian Newman, and Mohamed Wiem Mkaouer. 2022.
SATDBailiff-mining and tracking self-admitted technical debt. Science of Computer Programming 213 (2022), 102693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.
2021.102693
[2] Aaditya Bhatia, Foutse Khomh, Bram Adams, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2023. An Empirical Study of Self-Admitted Technical Debt in Machine Learning
Software. arXiv:2311.12019 [cs.SE]
[3] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner,
Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (Eds.), Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 1877–1901.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf
[4] Frank Buschmann. 2011. To Pay or Not to Pay Technical Debt. IEEE Software 28, 6 (2011), 29–31. https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2011.150
[5] Federico Cassano, John Gouwar, Daniel Nguyen, Sydney Nguyen, Luna Phipps-Costin, Donald Pinckney, Ming-Ho Yee, Yangtian Zi, Carolyn Jane
Anderson, Molly Q Feldman, Arjun Guha, Michael Greenberg, and Abhinav Jangda. 2023. MultiPL-E: A Scalable and Polyglot Approach to
Benchmarking Neural Code Generation . IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 07 (July 2023), 3675–3691. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2023.
3267446
[6] Chatbot Arena LLM Leaderboard 2024. LMarena AI. https://lmarena.ai/ Accessed: 2024-07-31.
[7] Banghao Chen, Zhaofeng Zhang, Nicolas Langrené, and Shengxin Zhu. 2024. Unleashing the potential of prompt engineering in Large Language
Models: a comprehensive review. arXiv:2310.14735 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14735
[8] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé, Jared Kaplan, Harrison Edwards, Yura Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg
Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder,
Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, David W. Cummings,
Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William H. Guss, Alex Nichol, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu
Jain, Andrew Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew M. Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie
Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large Language
Models Trained on Code. ArXiv abs/2107.03374 (2021). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235755472
[9] Shaiful Chowdhury, Hisham Kidwai, and Muhammad Asaduzzaman. 2024. Evidence is All We Need: Do Self-Admitted Technical Debts Impact
Method-Level Maintenance? arXiv:2411.13777 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.13777
[10] Ward Cunningham. 1992. The WyCash Portfolio Management System. In Addendum to the Proceedings on Object-Oriented Programming Systems,
Languages, and Applications (Addendum) (Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada) (OOPSLA ’92). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 29–30. https://doi.org/10.1145/157709.157715
[11] Ozren Dabic, Emad Aghajani, and Gabriele Bavota. 2021. Sampling Projects in GitHub for MSR Studies. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 18th International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) . 560–564. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR52588.2021.00074
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 29 =====
Understanding the Effectiveness of LLMs in Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Repayment 29
[12] Aryaz Eghbali and Michael Pradel. 2023. CrystalBLEU: Precisely and Efficiently Measuring the Similarity of Code. In Proceedings of the 37th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (Rochester, MI, USA) (ASE ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 28, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3551349.3556903
[13] Zhaoqiang Guo, Shiran Liu, Jinping Liu, Yanhui Li, Lin Chen, Hongmin Lu, and Yuming Zhou. 2021. How Far Have We Progressed in Identifying
Self-Admitted Technical Debts? A Comprehensive Empirical Study. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 30, 4, Article 45 (jul 2021), 56 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3447247
[14] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Yue Liu, Zhou Yang, Kailong Wang, Li Li, Xiapu Luo, David Lo, John Grundy, and Haoyu Wang. 2024. Large Language
Models for Software Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. (Sept. 2024). https://doi.org/10.1145/3695988
Just Accepted.
[15] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023.
Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles.
[16] Yikun Li, Mohamed Soliman, and Paris Avgeriou. 2023. Automatically Estimating the Effort Required to Repay Self-Admitted Technical Debt.
arXiv:2309.06020 [cs.SE]
[17] Jiakun Liu, Qiao Huang, Xin Xia, Emad Shihab, David Lo, and Shanping Li. 2021. An Exploratory Study on the Introduction and Removal of Different
Types of Technical Debt. Empirical Software Engineering 26 (2021), 16.
[18] Jiaxing Liu, Chaofeng Sha, and Xin Peng. 2023. An Empirical Study of Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning Methods for Pre-Trained Code Models. In
2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 397–408.
[19] Lin Long, Rui Wang, Ruixuan Xiao, Junbo Zhao, Xiao Ding, Gang Chen, and Haobo Wang. 2024. On llms-driven synthetic data generation, curation,
and evaluation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15126 (2024).
[20] Marcos Macedo, Yuan Tian, Filipe Cogo, and Bram Adams. 2024. Exploring the Impact of the Output Format on the Evaluation of Large Language
Models for Code Translation. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE/ACM First International Conference on AI Foundation Models and Software Engineering .
57–68.
[21] Everton Da S Maldonado, Rabe Abdalkareem, Emad Shihab, and Alexander Serebrenik. 2017. An empirical study on the removal of self-admitted
technical debt. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 238–248.
[22] Everton da Silva Maldonado and Emad Shihab. 2015. Detecting and quantifying different types of self-admitted technical Debt. In 2015 IEEE 7th
International Workshop on Managing Technical Debt (MTD) . 9–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/MTD.2015.7332619
[23] Antonio Mastropaolo, Massimiliano Di Penta, and Gabriele Bavota. 2023. Towards Automatically Addressing Self-Admitted Technical Debt: How
Far Are We? . In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA,
USA, 585–597. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE56229.2023.00103
[24] David OBrien, Sumon Biswas, Sayem Imtiaz, Rabe Abdalkareem, Emad Shihab, and Hridesh Rajan. 2022. 23 Shades of Self-Admitted Technical Debt:
An Empirical Study on Machine Learning Software. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (<conf-loc>, <city>Singapore</city>, <country>Singapore</country>, </conf-loc>) (ESEC/FSE 2022).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 734–746. https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3549088
[25] David OBrien, Sumon Biswas, Sayem Mohammad Imtiaz, Rabe Abdalkareem, Emad Shihab, and Hridesh Rajan. 2024. Are Prompt Engineering and
TODO Comments Friends or Foes? An Evaluation on GitHub Copilot. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software
Engineering. 1–13.
[26] Diogo Pina, Carolyn Seaman, and Alfredo Goldman. 2022. Technical debt prioritization: a developer’s perspective. InProceedings of the International
Conference on Technical Debt. 46–55.
[27] Andrea Pinna, Maria Ilaria Lunesu, Stefano Orrù, and Roberto Tonelli. 2023. Investigation on Self-Admitted Technical Debt in Open-Source
Blockchain Projects. Future Internet 15, 7 (2023). https://doi.org/10.3390/fi15070232
[28] Aniket Potdar and Emad Shihab. 2014. An Exploratory Study on Self-Admitted Technical Debt. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Software
Maintenance and Evolution. 91–100. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSME.2014.31
[29] J. Prenner and R. Robbes. 2022. Making the Most of Small Software Engineering Datasets With Modern Machine Learning. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 48, 12 (dec 2022), 5050–5067. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2021.3135465
[30] Python Software Foundation. 2024. difflib - Helpers for computing deltas . https://docs.python.org/3/library/difflib.html Python standard library.
[31] Xiaoxue Ren, Zhenchang Xing, Xin Xia, David Lo, Xinyu Wang, and John Grundy. 2019. Neural Network-Based Detection of Self-Admitted Technical
Debt: From Performance to Explainability. 28, 3, Article 15 (jul 2019), 45 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3324916
[32] Pranab Sahoo, Ayush Kumar Singh, Sriparna Saha, Vinija Jain, Samrat Sohel Mondal, and Aman Chadha. 2024. A Systematic Survey of Prompt
Engineering in Large Language Models: Techniques and Applications. ArXiv abs/2402.07927 (2024). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
267636769
[33] Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei and Yuan Tian. 2023. Automated Self-Admitted Technical Debt Tracking at Commit-Level: A Language-independent
Approach. In 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Technical Debt (TechDebt) . 22–26. https://doi.org/10.1109/TechDebt59074.2023.00009
[34] Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, SHAOWEI WANG, and Bowen Xu. 2024. An empirical study on the effectiveness of large language
models for SATD identification and classification. Empirical Software Engineering 29, 6 (oct 2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-024-10548-3
Manuscript submitted to ACM

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, Yuan Tian, Shaowei Wang, and Bowen Xu
[35] Murali Sridharan, Leevi Rantala, and Mika Mäntylä. 2023. PENTACET data-23 Million Contextual Code Comments and 250,000 SATD comments. In
2023 IEEE/ACM 20th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) . IEEE, 412–416.
[36] Jie Tan, Daniel Feitosa, and Paris Avgeriou. 2021. Do practitioners intentionally self-fix technical debt and why?. In2021 IEEE International Conference
on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 251–262.
[37] Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Gotmare, Nghi Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven Hoi. 2023. CodeT5+: Open Code Large Language Models for Code
Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Houda Bouamor, Juan
Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 1069–1088. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.68
[38] Jerin Yasmin, Mohammad Sadegh Sheikhaei, and Yuan Tian. 2022. A first look at duplicate and near-duplicate self-admitted technical debt comments.
In Proceedings of the 30th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Comprehension . 614–618.
[39] Fiorella Zampetti, Alexander Serebrenik, and Massimiliano Di Penta. 2018. Was self-admitted technical debt removal a real removal? an in-depth
perspective. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (Gothenburg, Sweden) (MSR ’18). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 526–536. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196398.3196423
[40] Fiorella Zampetti, Alexander Serebrenik, and Massimiliano Di Penta. 2020. Automatically Learning Patterns for Self-Admitted Technical Debt
Removal. In 2020 IEEE 27th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . 355–366. https://doi.org/10.1109/
SANER48275.2020.9054868
Manuscript submitted to ACM